Code for this section can be found on the branch `use-state`.

## Refactoring

We left the state, simple as it is, in an ugly way that I didn't quite like in the last section, so today we're going to clean that up a little bit. Realistically, there's no reason for us to pass the game's title into the app as a prop when it'll be set up in state and never changed. So, we're going to update our test to expect the game's real title in the output, and update our code to use React's `useState()` hook to set the title. If all goes well, our test should still pass and let us know we've made the change correctly.

First, though, I want to update our workflow a little. I like having the Jest tests running in `--watch` mode so I don't have to manually re-run the tests after every change. Let's add this new script to `package.json`:

```json
"scripts": {
  ...
  "test:watch": "jest --watch",
  ...
}
```

Now we run `npm run test:watch` and the Jest test runner stays active in our terminal, automatically re-running every time we make a change to a file. Nice!

Let's change our test to expect the default game title in the output:

```javascript
import React from 'react'
import { render } from 'ink-testing-library'
import { App } from '../App'

describe('APP', () => {
  it('returns the name of the game', () => {
    // Arrange
    const { lastFrame } = render(<App />)

    // Assert
    expect(lastFrame()).toMatch('TDD Roguelike!')
  })
})
```

This passes, because the component has a default state set up in its signature. We're going to get rid of that and replace it with a call to React's `useState()` hook, which will look a little cleaner and align with the way we're going to manage state going forward:

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react'
import { render, Text } from 'ink'

export const App = () => {
  let [title, setTitle] = useState("TDD Roguelike!") 
  return <Text>{title}</Text>
}

render(<App />)
```

`useState()` returns two things, which we destructure here; the string `"TDD Roguelike!"` which we store as `title`, and a helper function which we store as  `setTitle` that can change the title value elsewhere in the component.

Practically speaking, we'll never need to change the game's title from within the running game, so we can lock that down a bit:

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react'
import { render, Text } from 'ink'

export const App = () => {
  const [title, _] = useState("TDD Roguelike!") 
  return <Text>{title}</Text>
}

render(<App />)
```

That's done, and our test still passes. Good thing we had that test running to check our work!
