# Design Storm

At this point we've got the title figured out and printed to the screen - a fine POC for getting a bare minimum of Ink functionality tested and running. There are a few more things that naturally will just have to go into the game that we could begin to dive into, but first I want to get down some thoughts about the design of the game.

## Design Process

I'm not a game designer by practice, so I'll certainly not get it all done or done right on this first pass. I intend to get ideas about my game out of my mind and onto a list that I can turn into granular little pieces of work.

This is roughly the first level of the outline of ideas:

- Theme
- Arena
- Character
- Dungeon
- Combat
- Mobs
- Items

There's sure to be some overlap in there. Regardless, let's dive deeper on these.

## Theme

A while ago I did a playthrough of Baldur's Gate as a solo rogue character, and it was a lot of fun. The game uses AD&D 2nd edition rules, so the rogues and thieves in the game focus a lot on hiding in shadows, sneaking, backstabbing, and setting traps. I got pretty good at finding a room full of bad guys before they could spot me, doubling back the way I came while setting traps, hiding and sneaking back into the room full of bad guys, backstabbing one of them for big damage, then running like hell back the way I came while my traps rained hellfire on the enemies in pursuit.  Rinse and repeat until the game is out of quests. There are plenty of ways to handle combat in an expansive game like Baldur's Gate, but that was the way that suited me. After I beat that game I looked high and low for a game that had a similar mechanic for thieves; stealthy games, dungeon crawling roguelikes, other RPG's. Nothing really felt the same, until I started playing Cardinal's Quest 2.

CQ2 is a roguelike with an Android port that offers a thief class very similar to the BG experience. You have to earn X amount of points to unlock the thief class; this is done by clearing a few levels with the default fighter, bumping into mobs (enemies) until either they or your character croak. No finesse, really, in the fighter experience. But that's roguelikes! The thief, though, gets stealth and speed and a backstab bonus. So much fun. You can also pick up scrolls to cast spells like sleep and fear and charm. I've had a lot of good runs sneaking up on a monster, hitting them unawares, then putting them to sleep and finishing the job before they wake up, without any of the other monsters in the room even seeing me there. I love this. Fun fun fun. There is one thing missing: the ability to set traps.

The game I want will replicate this gameplay experience. Sneaky, thiefy, backstabby, little bit of magic, setting traps and running around, roguelike. That's the game I want to build.

I could set this as another sword and staff fantasy, but I think there might be room to sneak something novel, maybe even a little funny, in through the theme sidedoor. I got to thinking about traps, and what kind of person sets a trap, and what kind of character falls into a lot of traps. Fur traders trap a lot of little animals. Sneaky little animals. Animals good at hiding. Animals that couldn't do much damage in a head-to-head fight but, if they snuck up on a bigger enemy, could pick a choice spot to land a well-timed chomp with their buck teeth.

So, let's make a game where you're a little animal with prized fur, tasked with avoiding and reclaiming traps set by 17th-century French-Canadian trappers. The scrolls for spells can be all different medicinal plants and flowers. You can fight off bigger predators and monstrous humans with names like Pierre and Rousseau. You can carry your inventory around in the pouches inside your cheeks. As you level up you'll learn how to disarm and craft new traps to give the furriers a taste of their own medicine.

## Arena

The container for the game. We'll have to set bounds for the gameplay screen area and mount our generated worlds into it. The arena will handle updating our display on every iteration of the event loop. It'll be in charge of printing characters to the screen over and over; a visual representation of much of the game state.

The arena will also be the thing that changes over from our overworld view to a character stats view, an inventory view, and title/save/game-over screens. This stuff seems general enough that it can come first, before other programming tasks.

## Dungeon

In classic roguelike style, we're going to procedurally generate the maps for our game to inhabit, rather than having designed levels to play around in. This will let us work with some cool map-generating algorithms to get the levels into our game state. Given the theme of our game, I think it might be nice to have a few different map types, namely

- forest
- camp
- lodge

Forests will have lots of trees and shrubs and stuff to hide behind and slink around in with some wide-open areas and maybe rivers. Camps with be like towns, more gridlike than forests, with tents and cabins to slip into and find treasure in. Lodges are indoor structures, the closest we'll get to actual dungeons, with long hallways and doors and lots of stairs to descend.

In addition to finding appropriate map-generation algorithms for these types of maps, we're going to need to pepper them with spawn points for our character, mobs, chests, traps, and exits.

## Character

The player character in a game like this carries around a lot of game state. Health points, position, stats and skills, equipment and inventory, effects, modifiers. As we get this stuff online we'll also get to work on a character generation system for players to "roll their stats" before getting into the game. This might be as simple as choosing a perk (or a species?) like "trap tinkerer" or "sneaky sable" or whatever to adjust the defaults. As is tradition, the player character will be represented in the map as `@`.

## Mobs

A lot of the trickiest work is going to go into making enemies ("mobs", short for "mobile stuffs") seem lifelike and challenging. We'll need to give them things like path-finding and line-of-sight and awareness (or lack thereof) of the existence of our player character. I want them to do things like give chase, or flee, call for help, surround the PC. They should be able to use "magic" too so they can become invisible or heal or buff up when they know a fight is coming. Some of these should be bosses. Some should be shopkeepers, from whom you can buy medicine and pay with acorns. The humans should have procedurally generated French names and holler French phrases. Each mob should get its own avatar, in a range of colors. And, a lot of the time, mobs should be able to fight the player character.

## Combat

Mobs will have a lot of state, just like our PC. Health points, weapons, damage modifiers. A mob bumping into our player will possibly deal out and take some damage. Characters should be able to lob missiles like knives or stones at each other. Some attacks should have lingering effects, like a venomous snake bite. This is also where we'll set up traps and the damage and effects they can do. The numbers here will have to be balanced so that easy mobs are easy and difficult mobs are difficult.

## Items

We'll want the character to be able to pick up treasure. Some items will just be randomly laying around, some will be hidden in chests, and some will drop when a mob croaks. We'll have to be able to add and remove items from a character's inventory, and "equip" them to our character's (and mobs') various appendages. Maybe in hard mode, our player character won't know what effects plants have until they can be somehow identified or they try them out blindly. Some items will have a higher chance to spawn than others, particularly at different levels within the game.

## Miscellany

All of this sets up a lot of details, a lot of game logic to fine-tune to get the game to a right balance. I want to set the levers correctly so the player is rewarded for using stealth and traps to get far, but I don't want to completely block off emergent gameplay ideas that players may have. It should be possible, but not easy, to brute force your way through the game a bit. It should be possible, but not easy, to advance meaningfully in the game by just setting traps, or by never doing any damage to any mobs.

Should there be difficulty settings? Should the PC be able to pick from different species of animal, each with its own abilities and shortcomings? What's a good backronym for "TDD" that maps to our woodland creature theme?

Like I said, this is not meant to be a comprehensive design bible for the game. This is a dump of ideas, fodder to be turned into tickets on a bulletin board so I can move them from `TO-DO` to `DONE` one tidbit at a time. Testing the whole way, of course!
