# First Steps

## Preface

I'm going to build a [roguelike](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roguelike). It's going to reward sneakiness and stealth and backstabbing. The hero is going to set traps and disarm enemy traps and hide in the shadows and run like hell and it's going to be so much fun.

I'm going to use React Ink because it's kind of fascinating to me. I want the game to be playable on a terminal using NodeJS. I'm familiar with how React works for the web. I'm hopeful that this familiarity will let me focus more on game workingness and less on standing up a program that runs on the terminal

I'm going to use TDD practices to build this thing. That means any time I'm going to add or update a piece of code in the program, I'm going to write a test for that code first, so that by writing the new code the test will start passing. This way at any given time I'll be able to look back at my code and feel confident that it's doing what I expect it to be doing because it's all tested.

This post is an installment of my development notes while I work through this project. It's as much to remind me what was what while I was doing the work is it is, hopefully, useful to someone who's tackling a similar challenge.

The work will be tracked in Github if you'd like to follow along:  [https://github.com/thephilwells/tdd-roguelike](https://github.com/thephilwells/tdd-roguelike)

## Setup

### Initializing the repo

The result of this section of code can be found by checking out branch `first-steps`.

For local tools I'm using iTerm and VS Code on a Macbook Pro. There are endless articles and tutorials about these tools, so I won't go into great detail here, though it may occasionally provide good context to know about that.

I plan on tracking my work using `git` for version control and storing it up on Github. Being a big fan of the command line, I *should* create a new git repository on my local and then create a corresponding Github repo for it and set the remotes and all that, but I am lazy and always have to Google steps when I do it that way.

> Laziness: The quality that makes you go to great effort to reduce overall energy expenditure. *- Larry Wall*

So, instead, I create a new repository under my account using the Github interface. I've tried something new this time: I asked Github to provide me a Node-flavored `.gitignore` file, because I always forget to add `node_modules` before my first commit and I don't want to get fooled again. I give it README and an MIT license, then I clone that to my local.

```bash
git clone git@github.com:thephilwells/tdd-roguelike.git
```

I `cd` into the newly copied directory on my machine and I'm ready to resume.

I have NodeJS and `npm` set up on my machine already, so I run `npm init` in the cloned directory. I provide mostly defaults, taking care that I specify a test command when prompted: `jest`.

There's not much in there, but the addition of `package.json` at this point feels significant enough to me to warrant a commit.

I commit often. Very often. Particularly when practicing TDD, it's important to increment your commit log a notch every time you proceed a step in the process. TDD tends to use this cycle:

1. Write a failing test (commit!)
2. Make the test pass (commit!)
3. Refactor (commit!)

Mind you, just getting `npm init` done doesn't fit into this cycle, but it's good practice to commit small, worthwhile milestones. Ah, but first, let's make sure Github's `.gitignore` is doing its job.

```bash
cat .gitignore
```

Whoa. They gave us a lot of stuff to ignore. Is `node_modules` in there?

```bash

cat .gitignore | grep node_modules
```

Yep! Okay, we're fine to commit this and move on with installing our dependencies.

### Installing Dependencies

Since we're building a game using React Ink, we're going to need them installed as dependencies. I'm also going to install a package called `[chalk](https://www.npmjs.com/package/chalk)` that will let easily print colorful characters to the terminal

```bash
npm install --save react ink chalk
```

We're going to practice TDD while building this game, so we're going to need a test library. I'm going with Jest, because I think its snapshot capability is going to be a good fit for Ink's frame-based stdout outputs.

We're also going to use babel and a handful of babel plugins to get our React code working with our NodeJS runtime on the terminal.

```bash
npm install --save-dev jest @babel/cli @babel/core @babel/preset-env @babel/preset-react
```

Okay, looking good. Now we've got ourselves a hearty `node_modules` directory to ignore and a nice `package-lock.json` file to commit.

### Setting Up Our Tools

We need to add a few scripts to `package.json` so we'll be able to build and run our game:

```json
"scripts": {
    "test": "jest",
    "build": "babel src --out-dir=build --ignore '**/*.test.js'",
    "start": "npm run build && node build/App.js"
  },
```

We set up a `build` script that uses babel to translate our beautiful es6 React code into scratchy, old-school JavaScript that can be run by Node in our terminal. It'll put the distributable build files into a new directory called `/build` and it'll ignore test files.

We also add a `start` script that runs the build script and then uses Node to run the build application. Of course, we don't have anything to build or even any files to ignore, yet. Soon!

First, though, we have to set up our presets and plugins to get babel building our JS code the right way. We create a new file at the project root called `.babelrc` and put this into it:

```json
{
  "presets": ["@babel/env", "@babel/react"],
  "plugins": ["@babel/transform-runtime"]
}
```

Now that babel knows how to build our app, and we have scripts that tell node where to put it and how to run it, it's time to start building it out.

### Writing and Passing Our First Test

True to TDD form, in this section we're going to write a test that fails, then write some code to make it pass. Along the way we'll get an introduction into some basic workings of React, ink, and Jest.

Let's set up our folder structure. We'll do our initial work a in folder called `/src` and add tests under `/src/tests`

- src
    - test
        - App.test.js
    - App.js

Once I have this set up I open the blank `App.test.js` in my editor and stare at the wall for many moments. What now? I know what I'd do if this were a straightforward web application — Jest and ReactDOM would work together so I could mount a little React component on a web-like abstraction and run assertions against it. But this is React Ink. The application is going to be printed out to the terminal using `stdout`. How the heck am I supposed to mount that?

As it turns out, the same team behind the Ink project have also released a library called `ink-testing-library`. This introduces a `render()` method that returns an array of outputted frames from the component, along with helper methods to re-render the same component, write data to the component's `stdin` stream, and some other stuff too. Let's add it as a dependency to our project!

```bash
npm install --save-dev ink-testing-library
```

Ok, sweet. The first thing we want the game to do is take in some state and display some data from the state, like a title. A lot of the implementation of state here is going to change as we get more involved in the game's development; this will serve as a entry point into making sure we can get React Ink to render a component.

Let's write a dead simple test and watch it fail:

```jsx
// /src/test/App.test.js

import React from 'react'
import { render } from 'ink-testing-library'
import { App } from '../App'

const state = {
  title: "FOO GAME"
}

describe('APP', () => {
  it('returns the name of the game', () => {
    const { lastFrame } = render(<App state={state}/>)
    expect(lastFrame()).toMatch('FOO GAME')
  })
})
```

Note that we're importing something called `App` here which has yet to be written. That's fine; we expect the test to fail until we write code that makes it pass. In this test we set up some expectations around hat kind of data the app will take in, and what it'll show us as a result. Namely, the App will accept an object called `state`, and it will output the value for `title` from that object. Before we get to how the App component is going to do that, let's look at how we're using Jest and ink-testing-library here.

The `render()` method renders our component the same way Ink will when we're running the application, but it returns a special object that includes (among other things) a method to get the last rendered frame from `stdout`. `render()` also returns an array called `frames` which would allow us to read this value; in this case we're just using `lastFrame()` as a convenience.

The state object here looks pretty contrived for such a small application. I'm not too happy with it, but then I figure we're going to refactor how state gets into the top level of the game as it balloons in size, so we'll let it be this way for now. Baby steps.

We run this test using `npm test` and of course it fails. App.js doesn't exist yet. Let's create that now.

```jsx
// /src/App.js

import React from 'react'
import { render, Text } from 'ink'

export const App = ({ state = { title: 'TDD Roguelike!' } }) => {
  return <Text>{state.title}</Text>
}

render(<App />)
```

Oh, default parameters. I don't like the signature on this function, but it gets the job done. Like I said, state management will need to be refactored. 

So, what's happening here?

This looks like any other tiny React component expect that we're using the Ink rendering engine instead of ReactDOM. The `render()` here is going to take in the React component turn it into text, and pass it into the `stdout` stream, which will drop it onto our terminal.

When we run our test it passes a test string into our component and Jest validates that the last frame sent to `stdout` by that `render()` method matches the same string value. When we build and run this application, it doesn't get any state as input, so it uses the default value for `state.title` and sends that to `render()`. The test should pass now, and the app should even build and run:

```bash
> tdd-roguelike@1.0.0 start ~/homework/tdd-roguelike
> npm run build && node build/App.js

> tdd-roguelike@1.0.0 build ~/homework/tdd-roguelike
> babel src --out-dir=build --ignore '**/*.test.js'

Successfully compiled 1 file with Babel (413ms).
TDD Roguelike!
```

Phew! We came a long way just to get the game's title printed onto our terminal. Not that we have our testing and building foundation set and the placeholder for an entry point into our game, we'll be able to move onto setting up our gameplay area in the next installment.